---
layout: page
title: "Models"
category: ref
date: 2013-06-10 22:44:03
---

django-objectset comes with two abstract models. The primary one is `ObjectSet` which provides the set-like behavior and APIs.

```python
from objectset.models import ObjectSet

# ... Book model definition ...

class ReadingList(ObjectSet):
    books = models.ManyToManyField(Book)
```

That's it! Now you can create and operate on `ReadingList` instances as if they are sets.


```python
tags = ['cooking', 'culinary', 'music']
hobby = ReadingList(Book.objects.filter(tags__in=tags))

tags = ['bio', 'healthcare', 'informatics', 'bigdata']
work = ReadingList(Book.objects.filter(tags__in=tags))

tags = ['programming', 'web', 'database']
coding = ReadingList(Book.objects.filter(tags__in=tags))

# Anything between hobby and work?
hobby & work

# How about work without any coding?
work - coding
```

### SetObject

Sometimes it is desirable to know what has been added or removed from a set. This is generally the case when a set is _bulk_-created from some derived set of objects (import existing reading list from external system). As books are added or removed, it would be nice to flag this change. For example, if there is a system that generates recommendations based on your reading list, it would not be useful to recommend books the user had removed previously from their reading list.

This is where the `SetObject` class comes in handy. This is an abstract model to be used as the [itermediate model](https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/1.5/topics/db/models/#intermediary-manytomany) between the object set and the object model. It defines two boolean fields `added` and `removed` that are updated as operations are applied to the objects.

Here is the updated model definitions:

```python
from objectset.models import ObjectSet

# ... Book model definition ...

class ReadingList(ObjectSet):
    books = models.ManyToManyField(Book, through='ReadlingListBook')

class ReadlingListBook(SetObject):
    book = models.ForeignKey(book)
    reading_list = models.ForeignKey(ReadingList)
```

Although many-to-many relationships with through models are generally cumbersome to work with, the `ObjectSet` API handles working with them transparent. Just work with the sets like before, but now the intermediate object data will be updated accordingly.

#### Removed Objects

This introduces a side effect for the _removed_ objects from the set. They are not actually removed since we need to mark them as "removed" (which means we need to keep the reference around). If for any reason, those removed objects should really be deleted, simply use the `purge()` method on the set to removed all objects marked `removed` from the set.

For more granular control, all removal-based methods (`remove`, `clear`, and `replace`) take an optional argument `delete` that if `True` will immediately delete the object(s) from the set (for that operation) rather than marking them as removed.
