---
layout: page
title: "Methods"
category: ref
date: 2013-06-10 22:43:42
---

The `ObjectSet` class comes with the standard methods for interacting with sets. All calls are immediately applied and saved.

#### `add(obj, added=False)`

Add an object to the set. If using the [`SetObject` through model]({{ site.baseurl }}{% post_url 2013-06-10-models %}), the `added` flag will set the `added` status of the object in the set.

#### `remove(obj, delete=False)`

Remove an object from the set. If using the [`SetObject` through model]({{ site.baseurl }}{% post_url 2013-06-10-models %}), setting the `delete` flag to `True` will delete the object from the set rather than marking the object as `removed`.

#### `update(objs, added=True)`

Updates the set with `objs` that are not already in the set. This operation does not remove any objects from the set.

#### `clear(delete=False)`

Clears all objects from the set.

#### `replace(objs, delete=False, added=True)`

Replaces objects currently in the set with `objs`.

#### `bulk(objs, added=False)`

_Requires Django 1.4+_

Useful for populating a set for the first time. This method is used on the first save of a set.

```python
set1 = Set([1, 2, 3, 4, 5])
# uses bulk() internally
set1.save()
```

This method should only be used when you _know_ objects being loaded do not already exist in the set. This uses Django's [`bulk_create` method](https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/1.5/ref/models/querysets/#django.db.models.query.QuerySet.bulk_create) which does not perform any existential checks prior to loading (hence the performance boost). The database will of course complain if it causes any integrity issues.

#### `purge()`

If using the [`SetObject` through model]({{ site.baseurl }}{% post_url 2013-06-10-models %}), this will delete all objects in the set marked as `removed`.
